feat: SD-Core CUPS howto (#149)
canonical/charmed-5g: docs/how-to/deploy_cups_sdcore.md

# Deploy SD-Core with CUPS

This guide covers how to install a multi-node SD-Core with Control Plane and User Plane Separation (CUPS).

## Requirements

- Juju 3.1 or higher has been installed
- A load balancer type controller has been bootstrapped
- The Juju controller is externally reachable from both Kubernetes clusters
- Both the Kubernetes clusters have been added to the Juju controller as clouds

### Specific Requirements for Control Plane Kubernetes cluster

The Control Plane Kubernetes cluster has specific requirements that must be met before continuing.

- A load balancer (such as MetalLB) has been configured to expose 1 IP address for the Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF)

### Specific Requirements for User Plane Kubernetes cluster

The User Plane Kubernetes cluster has specific requirements that must be met before continuing.

- Multus has been enabled
- MACVLAN interfaces for access and core are available to Kubernetes

> - A load balancer (such as MetalLB) has been configured to expose 1 IP address for the User Plane Function (UPF)

Author: there are two load balancer terms floating around here
1. The juju controller must be bootstrapped as a load balancer type controller
2. The Kubernetes (metallb or other) load balancer services for exposing pods

We still need to ensure that point 1 is documented clearly

> - A load balancer (such as MetalLB) has been configured to expose 1 IP address for the User Plane Function (UPF)

Author: Does the new change resolve this?

## Guide Sample Values

For the purpose of this guide, the following values will be used.

### Networks
 
 | Name | Subnet | Gateway IP |
 | ---- | ------ | ---------- |
 | access | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
 | core   | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
 | gNB    | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

### Domain Name Server Entries

| Name | IP Address | Usage |
| ---- | ---------- | ----- |
| `upf.core` | 10.201.0.151 | Load balancer IP address for UPF |
| `amf.core` | 10.201.0.201 | Load balancer IP address for AMF |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The AMF hostname must be resolvable by the gNB and the IP address must be reachable and resolve to the AMF unit.

```

Author: This does not belong here where we are just listing example values.  Seeing as this is a how-to, perhaps none of these Guide Sample Values are needed at all then?

### MACVLAN Interfaces

| MACVLAN | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `access` | Maps to the `access` subnet |
| `core`   | Maps to the `core` subnet |

> ### Juju Clouds
> 
> | Cloud Name | Purpose |
> |------------|---------|
> | `control-plane-cluster` | Represents the Kubernetes cluster that executes all control plane functions |
> | `user-plane-cluster`    | Represents the Kubernetes cluster that executes all user plane functions |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Then we need to remove the usage of these clouds later?  Or do we just use them without defining what they are?

## Deploy SD-Core Control Plane

> Create a Juju overlay file that specifies the:
> - AMF host name
> - IP address for sharing with the radios
> 
> This host name must be resolvable by the gNB and the IP address must be reachable and resolve to the AMF unit.
> 
> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Juju overlay file with the following content:
```

```bash
cat << EOF > control-plane-overlay.yaml
applications:
  amf:
    options:
      external-amf-ip: 10.201.0.201
      external-amf-hostname: amf.core
EOF
```

Create a Juju model to represent the Control Plane, using the cloud `control-plane-cluster`.

```bash
juju add-model control-plane control-plane-cluster
```

Deploy the full bundle of software for the control plane:
```bash
juju deploy sdcore-control-plane --trust --channel=edge --overlay control-plane-overlay.yaml
```

> Expose the Software as a Service offer for the AMF.  This is only required if the gNB is deployed using a charm and has been designed to consume the AMF offer of the 5g N2 interface from the core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expose the integration offer for the AMF N2 interface. 
```

```bash
juju offer control-plane.amf:fiveg-n2
```

## Deploy SD-Core User Plane

> Create a Juju overlay file that specifies the Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF) host name and IP address for sharing with the radios.  This host name must be resolvable by the gNB and the IP address must be reachable and resolve to the AMF unit.
> 
> Create a Juju overlay file that specifies the:
> - Access gateway IP address
> - Access interface MACVLAN name
> - Access IP address to use for the UPF
> - Core gateway IP address
> - Core interface MACVLAN name
> - Core IP address to use for the UPF
> - gNB subnet that all radios for this UPF are on
> 
> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Juju overlay file with the following content:
```

```bash
cat << EOF > upf-overlay.yaml
applications:
  upf:
    options:
      access-gateway-ip: 10.202.0.1
      access-interface: access
      access-ip: 10.202.0.10/24
      core-gateway-ip: 10.203.0.1
      core-interface: core
      core-ip: 10.203.0.10/24
      gnb-subnet: 10.204.0.0/24
EOF
```

Create a Juju model to represent the User Plane, using the cloud `control-plane-cluster`.

```bash
juju add-model user-plane user-plane-cluster
```

> Deploy the bundle of software for the user plane:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy the user plane bundle:
```

> # Deploy SD-Core with CUPS

Reviewer 2: What do you think about spelling out what CUPS means? Everytime I see this, I think about the print server...

Reviewer: If we really want to use this accronym, we should introduce it. Ex.

```
This guide covers how to install a multi-node sdcore with Control Plane and User Plane Separation (CUPS)
```

> This guide covers how to install a multi-node sdcore with separation of user and control plane traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide covers how to install a multi-node SD-Core with separation of user and control plane traffic.
```

> ### Requirements

Reviewer: As warned when running `make run`, there is a non-consecutive header level increase; H1 to H3. This applies at a couple of places.

Author: Done

> You will need two kubernetes clusters as follows.  In this how-to, we cover installation and configuration of MicroK8s, however, any compatible Kubernetes cluster can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need two kubernetes clusters as follows:
```

- `SD-Core Control Plane`, where the full set of control plane functions will be placed (AMF, SMF, etc)
- `SD-Core User Plane`, where the User Plane Function (UPF) will be placed

> A separate machine is required for the Juju controller.  While it is possible to install Juju on the same host as the SD-Core Control Plane, it is not recommended to do so.  [`TODO:` note on metallb for juju controller]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A separate machine is required for the Juju controller. [`TODO:` note on metallb for juju controller]
```

> In the `SD-Core User Plane` cluster, the following subnets must be present:

Reviewer: I'd place this under the `SD-Core Control Plane` bullet. Maybe as a sub-bullet.

- `access`, where the UPF listens for incoming sessions from the gNB
- `core`, where the UPF send out traffic from the gNB towards the internet

> - `management`, for Juju and control plane traffic.  Must also have access to the internet for downloading container images, charms, or other updates as needed

Reviewer 2: I think we are getting to the point where it might make sense to take the decision if we rename the networks or not. I personally think we should, but it might make sense to get the point of view from upstream.

@gruyaume any thoughts on this?

Reviewer: I generally agree, this is more than a documentation effort though, we have to make changes in config in the UPF. We may want to keep this out of scope of this documentation change and create a new ticket that would include:
- Change in the UPF
- Change in this doc

Author: As this is larger than just documentation, we are not going to address this here.

[`TODO:` Add note about port security somewhere for the networks]

##### Sample Values

For the purpose of this guide, the following values will be used.

###### Subnets

| Name | VLAN | Subnet | Gateway IP |
| ---- | ---- | ------ | ---------- |
| management | 1201 | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| access     | 1202 | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| core       | 1203 | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |

###### IP Addresses

The only DNS entry that is required is for the AMF so that the gNB can be told where to find it [`TODO:` link to gnb interface reference]

| Name | IP Address | Purpose |
| ---- | ---------- | ------- |
| juju-controller.k8s.priv | 10.201.0.10 | Management address for Juju machine
| control-plane.k8s.priv | 10.201.0.11 | Management address for control plane cluster machine | 
| user-plane.k8s.priv | 10.201.0.12 | Management address for user plane cluster machine | 
| control-plane.juju.priv | 10.201.0.101 | Juju controller load balancer port |
| upf.core.priv | 10.201.0.151 | IP address for UPF to bind to |
| amf.core.priv | 10.201.0.201 | Externally reachable control plane endpoint for the AMF |

> `````{tab-set}

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the use of tab sets here, in the reference we use them as options (one **or** the other) and here we use them as a list of things to do (one **and** the other)

Author: can we come up with some guidelines then?

> ````{tab-item} Bootstrap

Reviewer: In this how-to we install microk8s and bootstrap it while in the single node one we don't. We should standardise and if possible I'd recommend to keep this out of the how-to. 

Ideally I'd recommend getting rid of the whole Bootstrap section. I understand in the tutorial why we want to have it but we want to avoid having how-to's that are specific to k8s distributions.

This section covers how to install Juju and Microk8s to act as the infrastructure for SD-Core, and may be skipped as needed.  If existing Kubernetes clouds are going to be used, Juju still must be bootsrapped using the appropriate `kubeconfig.yaml` file

----------------------
#### SD-Core Control Plane

All commands in this section are run on the SD-Core Control Plane Kubernetes cluster host.

Install Microk8s and configure Metallb to expose 1 IP address for the AMF:

```bash
sudo snap install microk8s --channel=1.27-strict/stable
sudo microk8s enable hostpath-storage
sudo microk8s enable metallb:10.201.0.201-10.201.0.201
```

Export the Kubernetes configuration and copy that to the controller:

```bash
sudo microk8s.config > control-plane-cluster.yaml
scp control-plane-cluster.yaml juju-controller.k8s.priv:
```

----------------------
#### SD-Core User Plane

> All commands in this section are run on the SD-Core Control Plane Kubernetes cluster host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All commands in this section are run on the SD-Core User Plane Kubernetes cluster host.
```

Install Microk8s, configure Metallb to expose 1 IP address for the UPF, and add the Multus plugin:

```bash
sudo snap install microk8s --channel=1.27-strict/stable
sudo microk8s enable hostpath-storage
sudo microk8s enable metallb:10.201.0.151-10.201-0.151
sudo microk8s addons repo add community \
    https://github.com/canonical/microk8s-community-addons \
    --reference feat/strict-fix-multus
sudo microk8s enable multus
```

Export the Kubernetes configuration and copy that to the controller:

```bash
sudo microk8s.config > user-plane-cluster.yaml
scp user-plane-cluster.yaml juju-controller.k8s.priv:
```

If not done already, create macvlan interfaces for Kubernetes to use when accessing the `access` and `core` networks. In this how-to, the following network interfaces are available on the SD-Core User Plane Microk8s machine:

- `ens3`: internal Kubernetes management interface.  This maps to the `management` subnet and must have an IP address.  In this how-to, the IP address should be `10.201.0.12`
- `ens4`: access interface.  This maps to the `access` subnet, and does not have an IP on the host.

> - `ens5`: core interface.  This maps to the `core` subnet, and does not have an IP on the host.  Note that internet egress is required here and routing tables must be set to route gNB generated traffic 

Reviewer 2: What do you think about adding an example routing table for that?

Author: I think it makes sense, but what shape could that take?  Just a table, or `iptables` commands?

Author: Removed from the howto as it is not relevant

> - `ens5`: core interface.  This maps to the `core` subnet, and does not have an IP on the host.  Note that internet egress is required here and routing tables must be set to route gNB generated traffic 

Reviewer: Those are mostly explanations. The how-to guides should really focus on telling people what to do, not the why. I think in a separate PR we could add a "Networking" category under "Explanation" that explains all this with diagrams.

Author: Using other documentation as a guideline, is this a better way to phrase it:

For the purposes of this tutorial, the following external network configuration is in place:
| Interface Name | Purpose |
|----------------------|-------------|
| ens3 | internal Kubernetes management interface.  This maps to the `management` subnet and must have an IP address.  For this how-to, the IP address is `10.201.0.12` |

Author: We explicitly use the named macvlan iface `access` and `core` in the charm, but nowhere else do we indicate that ens4 on the host becomes a macvlan iface called `access`. How should we handle that?

# Deploy SD-Core with CUPS

This guide covers how to install a multi-node SD-Core with Control Plane and User Plane Separation (CUPS).

## Requirements

- Juju >= 3.1
- A Juju controller has been bootstrapped, and is externally reachable
- A Control Plane Kubernetes cluster configured with
  - 1 available IP address for the Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF)
- A User Plane Kubernetes cluster configured with

>   - 1 available IP address for the User Plane Function (UPF)

Reviewer 3: For sdcore user plane preparing Macvlan bridges and network interfaces are missing.

Author: Added to L14
